# Player Rules

## Attributes

PCs have six abilities: **Strength**, **Dexterity**, **Constitution**, **Intelligence**, **Wisdom**, and **Charisma**. Each ability has two related values: a defense and a bonus.
Attributes are generated by rolling 3d6, assigning the lowest rolled die as the Attribute Bonus, in order. This means that starting Attributes Bonuses are between +1 and +6, tending towards lower values. For each attribute, add 10 to its bonus and write the result as the Attribute Defense.

### Using Attributes

* __Strength__:
  * The bonus is added to melee attacks as a to-hit bonus
  * Also used saves requiring physical power, like lifting gates, bending bars, etc.
* __Dexterity__:
  * Used for saves requiring poise, speed, and reflexes, like dodging, climbing, sneaking, balancing, etc.
  * A PC’s base number of item slots is equal to the middle of the median of their Dexterity, Constitution and Intelligence defense.
* __Constitution__:
  * The bonus is added to healing after a night rest
  * A PC’s base number of item slots is equal to the median of their Dexterity, Constitution and Intelligence defense.
  * Used for saves to resist poison, sickness, cold, harsh weather, etc.
* __Intelligence__:
  * Used for saves requiring concentration and precision, such as wielding magic, resisting magical effects, recalling lore, crafting objects, tinkering with machinery, picking pockets, etc.
  * A PC’s base number of item slots is equal to the median of their Dexterity, Constitution and Intelligence defense.
* __Wisdom__:
  * The bonus is added to ranged missile attacks as a to-hit bonus
  * Used saves requiring perception and intuition, such as tracking, navigating, searching for secret doors, detecting illusions, etc.
* __Charisma__:
  * PCs may employ a number of hirelings equal to their Charisma bonus. A PC may have a lifetime number of henchpersons equal to half their starting Charisma defense; Write it down during character creation.
  * Used for reaction rolls and saves to persuade, deceive, interrogate, intimidate, charm, provoke, etc.

### Additional Characteristics

* __Resilience__: Your resilience is the measure of how much mental and physical nicks, bruises, and eventually harm you may take before your body refuses to go on. When you take damage, tally it up. When you reach damage taken exactly equal to your Resilience, roll on the Death & Dismemberment table. When you reach damage taken higher than your Resilience, your character is considered dying, and is allowed one last goodbye with their companions before passing on.
  * Resilience per level is written in [Table X: Character Advancement](#Table-X-Character-Advancement).
* __Armor__: Armor comes with an armor defense value. Note that value on your character sheet with its corresponding Armor bonus (always 10 less than the defense). If your PC is not wearing any armor, their armor defense is 11 and their armor bonus is +1.
* __Inventory__: PCs have a number of item slots equal to the median of their Dexterity, Constitution and Intelligence defenses; items they carry must fit into available slots.
  * Most items take up one slot, but some take up more. Some small items can be bundled together into a single slot. Ask the referee if you are unsure.

## Template-based Classes

Player Characters start at level 0, without any class template. From level 1 onward, during [level up](#Leveling-up-Training-with-the-masters), characters may choose a class template to gain a few specialization bonus and tools. Characters cannot have more than 6 class templates in total.

Templates from different classes may be taken without restriction (mixing and matching is encouraged to customize and/or specialize your character), but they may only be taken in order, e.g. a "Fighter C" template may not be taken until the character has also taken the "A" and "B" template, but a "Pyromancer A" template may be taken along a "Catburglar B" template.

Each class template grants specialized abilities, as well as one [Action Die](#Action-Dices) of a specific type, and unique ways to use them in play.

The Classes and Templates available selection should be tailored to the campaign run by the referee.

## Action Dices

All class templates give an action die, that may be spent during specific circumstances to improve the action being attempted. All action dices are d6. When a die is spent, the player rolls, even if the action attempted does not care about the resulting face, as the dices are retained when they roll a 1, 2 or 3.
Actions may care about the result of the dice roll in many different ways, here are a few examples:

* [count]: the number of dice spent
* [sum]: the sum of the rolled values
* [highest]/[lowest]: the highest (resp. lowest) value rolled on a die

Action dices are recovered after a good night rest.

### Fighting Dices

Fighting dices are granted by templates that enhance a character ability for physical confrontation (as a fighter, an archer, a brawler, etc.). In addition to what the template grants, they may be spent as follow:

* Precision Strike: Before rolling the attack, grants +[count] bonus to hit
* Power Attack: Before rolling the attack, trades -[count] to attack for +[sum] bonus to damage
* While using a shield, reduces incoming damage by [sum]. This may be used to reduce damage for a close ally.

### Skill Dices

Skill dices are granted by templates that enhance a character ability for non-combat, non-magic skills (as a thief, a tracker, a crafter). In addition to benefits granted by templates, skill dice may be spent as follow:

* Before rolling for the skill, grants +[highest] to the result
* Once per procedure turn, after rolling for the skill, you may spend 1 die to re-roll without time penalty (i.e. try to act again in the same turn)

### Magic Dices

Magic dices are granted by templates that allows characters to practice magic without any external help. Their usage are governed by [template features](#Template-based-classes) and spell-casting.

### Notes

Legendary items and Artifacts may grant characters additional dices of the type appropriate for the items (Sentient swords may give Fighting dices, Eldritch Tomes may give Magic dices, Enchanted tools may give Skill dices, etc.)

## Advancement

To advance in level, your total XP must be above your next level threshold. When this happen, you may take the needed downtime to [find a master](#Leveling-up-Training-with-the-masters) to train you. After training is complete, you may choose 3 stats, add a +1 bonus to them (then adjust their Defense accordingly), then mark down your new Resilience maximum and you new XP threshold.

#### Table X: Character Advancement

| Level | XP Total Threshold | Max Resilience | Class Templates |
| :---: | :----------------: | :------------: | :-------------: |
|   1   |         -          |     Con-4      |        1        |
|   2   |        2000        |     Con-2      |        2        |
|   3   |        4000        |      Con       |        3        |
|   4   |        8000        |     Con+2      |        4        |
|   5   |       15 000       |     Con+4      |        5        |
|   6   |       30 000       |     Con+6      |        6        |
|   7   |       50 000       |     Con+7      |        -        |
|   8   |      100 000       |     Con+8      |        -        |
|   9   |      200 000       |     Con+9      |        -        |
|  10   |      500 000       |     Con+10     |        -        |
|  +1   |      +300 000      |       +1       |        -        |

### Why and How: "Treasure Value-for-XP", a.k.a. Earning XP by uncovering treasure

_For a more detailed explanation I agree with, see the "Location-Based Games" series at [Haugthy Fantasy Adventures](http://haughtyfantasy.blogspot.com/): [Part 1](http://haughtyfantasy.blogspot.com/2021/02/location-based-games-part-1-clarifying.html), [Part 2](http://haughtyfantasy.blogspot.com/2021/02/location-based-games-part-2-textured.html) [Part 3](http://haughtyfantasy.blogspot.com/2021/02/location-based-games-part-3-but-what.html)._

"Treasure Value-for-XP" (usually mentioned or noted as Gold-for-XP) is a advancement paradigm that encourages player-driven objectives and adventuring. The feedback loop is simple :

1. Adventuring rewards characters with liquid currency (in the form of silver/gold pieces, or treasure to be sold)
2. Players have currency to spent for personal goals
3. But this currency is finite, and/or Some goals are more costly than what the characters currently have
4. Players can go adventuring to get more currency
5. Go to 1., Adventuring rewards with currency, etc.

Furthermore, XP for Treasure value is only counted and awarded when the characters bring their hard-earned/ill-gotten treasure back to a know safe town. In this sense, leveling is akin to the growing reputation of the members of the party.

For this rule-set, XP is counted thus: **Each 1 Silver Piece of treasure brought to the safety of a civilized town counts as 1 XP for the whole group**, to be divided evenly between each player character that participated in the adventure. This is counted before the treasure itself is divided between characters and henchpersons.

### Leveling up: Training with the masters

As XP abstracts reputation in the current campaign setting, leveling can be done when a character reach a certain threshold by finding an NPC of the class you, the player, want your character to take a template level in and asking them to train your character. Here are the specific rules for advancement:

* To be able to train for a template, the party (not necessarily the specific character) must know/have discovered an NPC or a faction that is a master of this class.
* Training for a new level takes two weeks of downtime, starting from a safe town, including travel to and from the town.
* Training cost gold equal to 10% of the target character level (e.g. going from lvl 1 to lvl 2 cost 10% of the lvl 2 XP threshold)

After training, characters advance in level and obtain each benefit listed in the [advancement table](#Advancement) for the level they have attained.
