# Player Rules

- [Player Rules](#player-rules)
  - [Attributes](#attributes)
    - [Attributes Description](#attributes-description)
    - [Using Attributes](#using-attributes)
      - [Making Skill checks](#making-skill-checks)
      - [Making Saves](#making-saves)
    - [Additional Characteristics](#additional-characteristics)
  - [Template-based Classes](#template-based-classes)
  - [Action Dices](#action-dices)
    - [Fighting Dices](#fighting-dices)
      - [Basic Fighting Die Usages](#basic-fighting-die-usages)
      - [Combat Mishaps](#combat-mishaps)
    - [Skill Dices](#skill-dices)
      - [Basic Skill Die Usages](#basic-skill-die-usages)
      - [Skill Mishaps](#skill-mishaps)
    - [Magic Dices & Spellcasting](#magic-dices--spellcasting)
      - [Spellcasting](#spellcasting)
      - [Spellbooks](#spellbooks)
      - [Scrolls](#scrolls)
      - [Wands](#wands)
      - [Identifying Magic](#identifying-magic)
      - [Magic Mishaps](#magic-mishaps)
      - [Magic Dooms](#magic-dooms)
    - [Notes](#notes)
  - [Advancement](#advancement)
    - [Why and How: "Treasure Value-for-XP", a.k.a. Earning XP by uncovering treasure](#why-and-how-treasure-value-for-xp-aka-earning-xp-by-uncovering-treasure)
    - [Leveling up: Training with the masters](#leveling-up-training-with-the-masters)
    - [Leveling Up: Beyond Training](#leveling-up-beyond-training)
    - [Backup Experience](#backup-experience)
  - [Injuries, Dismemberment and Death](#injuries-dismemberment-and-death)
    - [Incurring Injuries](#incurring-injuries)
    - [Recovering from injuries](#recovering-from-injuries)
    - [A new Path](#a-new-path)

## Attributes

PCs have six abilities: **Strength**, **Dexterity**, **Constitution**, **Intelligence**, **Wisdom**, and **Charisma**. Each ability has two related values: a defense and a bonus.
Attributes are generated by rolling 3d6, assigning the lowest rolled die as the Attribute Bonus, in order. This means that starting Attributes Bonuses are between +1 and +6, tending towards lower values. For each attribute, add 10 to its bonus and write the result as the Attribute Defense.

### Attributes Description

- __Strength__:
  - The bonus is added to melee attacks as a to-hit bonus
  - Used for skill checks and saves requiring physical power, like lifting gates, bending bars, etc.
- __Dexterity__:
  - Used for skill checks and saves requiring poise, speed, and reflexes, like dodging, climbing, sneaking, balancing, etc.
  - A PC’s base number of item slots is equal to the middle of the median of their Dexterity, Constitution and Intelligence defense.
- __Constitution__:
  - When recuperating after a good night rest, subtract your **Constitution** bonus from your accrued Damage.
  - A PC’s base number of item slots is equal to the median of their Dexterity, Constitution and Intelligence defense.
  - Used for skill checks and saves to resist poison, sickness, cold, harsh weather, etc.
- __Intelligence__:
  - Used for skill checks and saves requiring concentration and precision, such as wielding magic, resisting magical effects, recalling lore, crafting objects, tinkering with machinery, picking pockets, etc.
  - A PC’s base number of item slots is equal to the median of their Dexterity, Constitution and Intelligence defense.
- __Wisdom__:
  - The bonus is added to ranged missile attacks as a to-hit bonus
  - Used for skill checks and saves requiring perception and intuition, such as tracking, navigating, searching for secret doors, detecting illusions, etc.
- __Charisma__:
  - PCs may employ a number of hirelings equal to their Charisma bonus. A PC may have a lifetime number of henchpersons equal to half their starting Charisma defense; Write it down during character creation.
  - Used for Morale and Reaction rolls.
  - Used for skill checks and saves to persuade, deceive, interrogate, intimidate, charm, provoke, etc.

### Using Attributes

#### Making Skill checks

When attempting something where the outcome is uncertain and failure has consequences, you make a skill check. To make a skill check, roll a d20, then add the relevant ability bonus to the result, plus anything from skill die usage. If the total is greater than 15 (so >= 16), they succeed, if not, they fail.

- If you didn't use any Tools for this skill check (e.g. breaking down a door with brute force)
  - On a Success: You get the intended result, but this took the whole turn.
  - On a Failure: Nothing happens, and this took the whole turn.
- If you used an appropriate toolkit (e.g. forcing a door with a crowbar, or picking the lock):
  - On a Success: You get the intended result, and the rest of the party may act on what you achieved (if they didn't act this turn yet)
  - On a Failure: you get the intended result, but this took the whole turn

Note that, regardless of the roll result, making noise may attract some company!

#### Making Saves

When trying to resist dangerous effects, you make a saving throw, or “save”. To make a save, add the bonus of the relevant ability to a d20 roll. If the total is greater than to 15 (so >= 16), your character resists. If not, they incur the full effect.

### Additional Characteristics

- __Resilience__: Your resilience is the measure of how much mental and physical nicks, bruises, and eventually harm you may take before your body refuses to go on. When you take damage, tally it up. When you reach damage taken exactly equal to your Resilience, roll on the Death & Dismemberment table. When you reach damage taken higher than your Resilience, your character is considered dying, and is allowed one last goodbye with their companions before passing on.
  - Resilience per level is written in [Table X: Character Advancement](#leveling-up-training-with-the-masters).
- __Armor__: Armor comes with an armor defense value. Note that value on your character sheet with its corresponding Armor bonus (always 10 less than the defense). If your PC is not wearing any armor, their armor defense is 11 and their armor bonus is +1.
- __Inventory__: PCs have a number of item slots equal to the median of their Dexterity, Constitution and Intelligence defenses; items they carry must fit into available slots.
  - Most items take up one slot, but some take up more. Some small items can be bundled together into a single slot. Ask the referee if you are unsure.

## Template-based Classes

Player Characters start at level 0, without any class template. From level 1 onward, during [level up](#leveling-up-training-with-the-masters), characters may choose a class template to gain a few specialization bonus and tools. Characters cannot have more than 6 class templates in total.

Templates from different classes may be taken without restriction (mixing and matching is encouraged to customize and/or specialize your character), but they may only be taken in order, e.g. a "Fighter C" template may not be taken until the character has also taken the "A" and "B" template, but a "Pyromancer A" template may be taken along a "Cat-burglar B" template.

Each class template grants specialized abilities, as well as one [Action Die](#action-dices) of a specific type, and unique ways to use them in play.

The Classes and Templates available selection should be tailored to the campaign run by the referee.

## Action Dices

All class templates give an action die, that may be spent during specific circumstances to improve the action being attempted. All action dices are d6. When a die is spent, the player rolls, even if the action attempted does not care about the resulting face, as the dices are retained when they roll a 1, 2 or 3.
Actions may care about the result of the dice roll in many different ways, here are a few examples:

- [dice]: the number of dice spent
- [sum]: the sum of the rolled values
- [highest]/[lowest]: the highest (resp. lowest) value rolled on a die

Action dices are recovered after a good night rest.

### Fighting Dices

Fighting dices are granted by templates that enhance a character ability for physical confrontation (as a fighter, an archer, a brawler, etc.).

#### Basic Fighting Die Usages

In addition to what the template grants, they may be spent as follow:

- Precision Strike: Before rolling the attack, grants +[dice] bonus to hit
- Power Attack: Before rolling the attack, trades -[dice] to attack for +[sum] bonus to damage
- While using a shield, reduces incoming damage by -[sum]. This may be used to reduce damage for a close ally.

#### Combat Mishaps

If you roll doubles when attacking, roll on your class's mishap table. If you gained Fighting Dice from multiple classes, choose one before rolling.

### Skill Dices

Skill dices are granted by templates that enhance a character ability for non-combat, non-magic skills (as a thief, a tracker, a crafting specialist).

#### Basic Skill Die Usages

In addition to benefits granted by templates, skill dice may be spent as follow:

- When rolling for the skill, grants +[highest] to the result
- Once per procedure turn, after rolling for the skill, you may spend 1 die to re-roll without time penalty (i.e. try to act again in the same turn)

#### Skill Mishaps

If you roll doubles while using skills, roll on your class's mishap table. If you gained Skill Dice from multiple classes, choose one before rolling. You still obtain the result as rolled, but nicked tools and cuts happen even to the best.

### Magic Dices & Spellcasting

Magic dices are granted by templates that allows characters to practice magic without any external help. Their usage are governed by [template features](#template-based-classes) and spell-casting.

#### Spellcasting

It takes 1hr to move any number of spells between your brain and a scroll, spell-book, or wand.

To cast a spell, select a number of Magic Dice (MD) you wish to invest, roll them, and add the numbers together. Most spells depend on the number of [dice] invested and the [sum] they show. If you roll doubles, see the Mishap section. If you roll triples, see the Doom section.

Dice that roll 1-3 return to your casting pool and can be used again that day. Dice that roll 4-6 are removed from your casting pool for the day. Your spells return at sunrise to last location they were imprisoned, when the octarine light of the sun touches the world and infuses Creation with an extra boost of raw magic. Your MD return if you get a good night's sleep. If you didn't sleep well, you can Save with Int for each MD to have them return to your pool anyway.

#### Spellbooks

A solid volume, with thick vellum pages and a sturdy cover. Each school produces its own style. Inside, special runes and symbols trap spells inside cages of crystallized thought. Each book contains 10 spell slots. Some spells must be stored across several pages for safety, so the books contain more than 10 pages, and have plenty of room for notes, ledgers, or sketches. Spellbooks start in a waterproof, acid- and fire-resistant bag. Outside the bag, they are not waterproof. They are flammable. And they are also valuable - each book is worth 10gp even if it contains no spells.

#### Scrolls

A page from a spellbook, effectively, but with some extra magic built in. If you cast a spell from a scroll, you can choose to burn the scroll. If you do, add +1 MD to your roll. This MD does not return to your pool. You can generate Mishaps and Dooms while using a scroll. A blank scroll is worth 1gp.

#### Wands

Wands are like scrolls, but customized for quick use, concealment, and rapid reuse. A wand has a number of banked MD. You can spend these MD when you cast a spell from a wand, but you can't add in your own MD. These MD do not return to your pool (or the wand's pool). It takes the standard 1hr to load a spell from your brain or spellbook into a wand. Using a wand can generate Mishaps and Dooms.

You can choose, when you move a spell, to try to invest 1 MD into the wand. You can only do this once per day, and you take d6 damage from the strain. The MD invested in the wand is permanently added to the wand's MD bank. Each day, you can add another MD to the bank, as above. Banking a MD reduces your total for the day, but you regain the full number of MD with a good night's sleep.

Most wands can only accept 4 banked MD and 1 spell. Larger wands, called staves, can hold up to 6 banked MD and up to 3 spells. Wands are traditionally made from the wood of lightning-struck trees.

Non-spell-casters can use wands. If they suffer a Mishap, use the table from the school that prepared the wand. If they suffer a Doom, the automatically suffer the Third Doom from the wand's school, which usually means instant death.

#### Identifying Magic

Wizards can smell magic in the air. By tasting, rubbing, or closely inspecting an item, you can tell if it is magic. You may need to test the item to determine what type of magic. You can make an Intelligence skill check to see if you can learn anything else about the item without testing it.

#### Magic Mishaps

If you roll doubles while casting a spell, roll on your school's mishap table. Unless otherwise specified, the spell still works. Magic is dangerous; this was just a hiccough or misfire.

#### Magic Dooms

If you roll triples while casting a spell, one of your school's Dooms takes effect. Each school has 3 dooms. The third doom is invariable fatal or worse. All wizards walk a dangerous path. The burn their soul s like candles, and in doing so, court damnation.

### Notes

Legendary items and Artifacts may grant characters additional dices of the type appropriate for the items (Sentient swords may give Fighting dices, Eldritch Tomes may give Magic dices, Enchanted tools may give Skill dices, etc.).

## Advancement

### Why and How: "Treasure Value-for-XP", a.k.a. Earning XP by uncovering treasure

_For a more detailed explanation I agree with, see the "Location-Based Games" series at [Haughty Fantasy Adventures](http://haughtyfantasy.blogspot.com/): [Part 1](http://haughtyfantasy.blogspot.com/2021/02/location-based-games-part-1-clarifying.html), [Part 2](http://haughtyfantasy.blogspot.com/2021/02/location-based-games-part-2-textured.html) [Part 3](http://haughtyfantasy.blogspot.com/2021/02/location-based-games-part-3-but-what.html)._

"Treasure Value-for-XP" (usually mentioned or noted as Gold-for-XP) is a advancement paradigm that encourages player-driven objectives and adventuring. The feedback loop is simple :

1. Adventuring rewards characters with liquid currency (in the form of silver/gold pieces, or treasure to be sold)
2. Players have currency to spent for personal goals
3. But this currency is finite, and/or Some goals are more costly than what the characters currently have
4. Players can go adventuring to get more currency
5. Go to 1., Adventuring rewards characters with currency, etc.

Furthermore, XP for Treasure value is only counted and awarded when the characters bring their hard-earned/ill-gotten treasure back to a know safe town. In this sense, leveling is akin to the growing reputation of the members of the party.

For this rule-set, XP is counted thus: **Each 1 Silver Piece of treasure brought to the safety of a civilized town counts as 1 XP for the whole group**, to be divided evenly between each player character that participated in the adventure. This is counted before the treasure itself is divided between characters and henchpersons.

### Leveling up: Training with the masters

To advance in level, your total XP must be above your next level threshold. When this happen, you may take the needed downtime to [find a master](#leveling-up-training-with-the-masters) to train you. After training is complete, you may choose 3 stats, add a +1 bonus to them (then adjust their Defense accordingly), then mark down your new Resilience maximum and you new XP threshold.

*Table X: Character Class Advancement*
| Level | XP Total Threshold | Max Resilience | Class Templates | Attribute Increases |
| :---: | :----------------: | :------------: | :-------------: | :-----------------: |
|   1   |         -          |     Con-4      |        1        |  +1 for 3 bonuses   |
|   2   |        1500        |     Con-2      |        2        |  +1 for 3 bonuses   |
|   3   |        4000        |      Con       |        3        |  +1 for 3 bonuses   |
|   4   |        8000        |     Con+2      |        4        |  +1 for 3 bonuses   |
|   5   |       15 000       |     Con+4      |        5        |  +1 for 3 bonuses   |
|   6   |       30 000       |     Con+6      |        6        |  +1 for 3 bonuses   |

As XP abstracts adventuring prowess and reputation in the current campaign setting, leveling can be done when a character reach a certain threshold by finding an NPC of the class you, the player, want your character to take a template level in and asking them to train your character. Here are the specific rules for advancement:

- To be able to train for a specific class template, the party (not necessarily the character themselves) must know/have discovered an NPC or a faction that is a master of this class.
- Training for a new level takes two weeks of downtime, starting from a safe town, including travel to and from the town.
- Training cost silver equal to 10% of the target character level
  - For example, attaining level 2 requires a PC to find 1500s worth of treasure, then paying 150s and spending 2 weeks with a master for training.

After training, characters advance in level and obtain each benefit listed in the advancement table, just above, for the level they have attained.

### Leveling Up: Beyond Training

*Table X: Character Advancement, beyond classes*
| Level | Investment Threshold | Max Resilience | Class Templates | Attribute Increases |
| :---: | :------------------: | :------------: | :-------------: | :-----------------: |
|   7   |        25 000        |     Con+7      |        -        |  +1 for 3 bonuses   |
|   8   |        50 000        |     Con+8      |        -        |  +1 for 3 bonuses   |
|   9   |       100 000        |     Con+9      |        -        |  +1 for 3 bonuses   |
|  10   |       200 000        |     Con+10     |        -        |  +1 for 3 bonuses   |
|  +1   |       +200 000       |       +1       |        -        |  +1 for 3 bonuses   |

After reaching level 6 (and acquiring your last class template), training is not sufficient enough to continue advancing. In order to keep advancing, characters must invest in long-lasting projects (Strongholds, Magical Workings, etc.) in order to gain experience as reputation.

Furthermore, as you continue to level up, you gain titles to represent acknowledgment of your deed by the powerful of the civilized world. If you have a specific ancestry, you may choose their title list. If you have at least 3 templates in an Occupation, you may instead choose the column matching its theme for your title progression.

*Table X: High level Occupation Titles*
| Level |   Fighters   |  Magic Users  |   Cleric    |    Specialists    |     Thieves     |
| :---: | :----------: | :-----------: | :---------: | :---------------: | :-------------: |
|   7   |  Baron·ess   | Thaumaturgist |   Curate    |   Wrenchmaster    |   Cat Burglar   |
|   8   |  Count·ess   |    Warlock    |   Bishop    |  Chief Mechanic   | Master Pilferer |
|   9   |  Marquis·e   |    Wizard     |  Justiciar  | Engineer Emeritus |    Trickster    |
|  10+  | Duke/Duchess |   Archmage    | High Priest |   Guild Master    |  Master Thief   |

*Table X: High level Ancestry Titles*
| Level |    Humans    |   Dwarves   |   Halflings   |   Elves    |
| :---: | :----------: | :---------: | :-----------: | :--------: |
|   7   |  Baron·ess   |    Lord     | Village Elder |  Strider   |
|   8   |  Count·ess   |  Forgelord  |       -       |   Warden   |
|   9   |  Marquis·e   |    Thane    |       -       |
|  10+  | Duke/Duchess | Hammerthane |       -       | Pathfinder |

### Backup Experience

When gaining Experience, you may add an extra 20% of it to your **Backup Experience**, used to level up new characters after your current character either dies or retires.

Note: Even after reaching level 6, you still count 20% of the treasure brought to the safety of a town as **Backup Experience**.

## Injuries, Dismemberment and Death

### Incurring Injuries

Death is par for the course when adventuring, but it need not be a tragedy. The basics of it are:

- When your accrued damage reach your Resilience, roll on the **Dismemberment** table below.
  
Which means in practice:

- You are out of the action. You need at least a full hour in a safe space to gather your spirits, and even additional first aid depending on the injury sustained.
- You suffer the rolled injury, which takes out one of your inventory slots.
  - If the slot contained an item, you drop it at the moment you suffer the injury.
  - To ease tracking, write your injuries starting from the end of your inventory.

To roll on the **Dismemberment** table, roll 1d10 + the number of injuries you currently suffer from, then diegetically adjust to the current situation.

*Table X: Injuries & Dismemberment*
|  Die  |     Injury     | Immediate Effect                                                                                     | Until recovery                                                                                      |
| :---: | :------------: | :--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|  1-2  |  Maybe a scar  | Definitely a scar. Roll a d4, on a 1, it's located where you can hide it within your clothes         | Nothing, luckily                                                                                    |
|  3-4  |   Concussion   | You cannot use Action die for the rest of the day                                                    | Nothing, yet                                                                                        |
|  6-7  | Lost extremity | Roll d6 to find out what you lost: <br/>1. Fingers (d3); 2. Hand; 3. Nose; 4. Ear; 5. Eye; 6. Looks. | Disadvantage on tasks requiring that former extremity.                                              |
|   8   |  Leg Useless   | Pass out from the pain. You need an additional hour to regain consciousness                          | Can’t run. Disadvantage on agility tasks                                                            |
|   9   |  Arm Useless   | Pass out from the pain. You need an additional hour to regain consciousness                          | Disadvantage when needing both arms or if it was the dominant hand                                  |
|  10   |   Head wound   | Lose half your action dice.                                                                          | Disadvantage on all rolls                                                                           |
|  11   |   Lost Limb    | You can't stand on your own, needing help and support to move                                        | Same as useless leg or arm, but it won't regrow. Disadvantage becomes a permanent -2 after recovery |
|  12   |   Hemorrhage   | You are bleeding out, and need tending to in d4 turns or you will die exsanguine.                    | Your action dice count as 3 (for the total roll, not the keeping-it part) when rolled as 3+.        |
|  13+  |     Death      | Your luck has run out, and Death comes to take its toll                                              | You aren't expected to recover from this one...                                                     |

### Recovering from injuries

To recover from injuries, you need rest, plain and simple. You need 1 cumulative week of rest for each injury you currently have to recover from them, e.g. if you currently have 3 injuries, you need 3 weeks to recover from one injury, then 2 weeks for the next, then 1 week for the last one.

After recovery, you regain the inventory slots incapacitated by injury.

You may choose to interrupt rest if you wish to go back adventuring before full recovery, but you only heal after each rest threshold (N weeks of rest for an injury when you have N injuries)

### A new Path

Now, loosing a character does not means the end of it all: If you are adventuring which henchpeoples (either one of your character's, or one of a fellow character's), you are allowed to "promote" one of them, and adopt them as your new PC. If you prefer to create another PC, say so to the Referee, roll another one using the rules in [Character Discovery](CharacterCreation.md). After choosing which character to play, you may use any [backup Experience](#backup-experience) to level them up, up to half your previous PC level, on the spot if you wish to (you may also restart from level 1 if you prefer).
